{
"section": "Challenges",
"content": "Scheduling posed a challenge on the DOEHRS-IH project as teams for governmentsponsored projects must often coordinate their schedules with those of other government initiatives. In the case of DOEHRS-IH, the project manager needed to integrate the scheduling and sequencing of the technical work on the project with the Defense Acquisition System’s requirements and constraints.\n\nAn urgent deadline also contributed to scheduling challenges. The project had been delayed for nearly three years and was at risk of being shut down altogether as users of the would-be system disagreed about minimum system requirements. Following 9/11, however, the potential for additional terrorist attacks placed a new urgency on the project.\n\nThe system’s requirements also created additional budget and schedule challenges. The system would be web-based, but would also need to be mobile and operable when not connected to the Internet, a requirement not in the original scope.\n\nTo help speed the government’s response to potentially catastrophic situations affecting the military or general public, the DOD began development of the Defense Occupational and Environmental Health Readiness System—Industrial Hygiene (DOEHRS-IH). Treating patients who had encountered a dangerous substance often proved difficult as their medical histories and other paperwork were not always readily available. Developed as a web-based application, the DOEHRS-IH would provide nearly real-time environmental monitoring capability and would eliminate the need for patients’ paper records.\n\nCommunicating with the project’s stakeholders also presented a challenge. The DOD, Army, Navy and Air Force required prompt and accurate communications on the project’s progress. In order to prevent skepticism or frustration, the project team needed to ensure that each of these groups received the appropriate information at the appropriate times.",
"notes": "Original title: Challenges"
}
{
"section": "Project Management Solutions",
"content": "In order to successfully navigate these scheduling, budget and communications challenges, the DOEHRS-IH team used project management knowledge areas and methodologies described in A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide). In addition, the DOEHRS-IH project benefited from the expertise and knowledge of its team and its manager – a certified Project Management Professional (PMP)®. The team used schedule and scope management processes to overcome scheduling challenges and to compensate for time lost during previous delays and setbacks. The project team also reused many components of the web-based system when creating the mobile system, saving significant development time and eliminating the need for user training on an entirely different system. To overcome budget challenges, the team used change control methodologies, which enable project teams to closely monitor activity to ensure that each action is the most efficient means of reaching a project’s goals. By using these methodologies, the project team was able to reevaluate the scope of work and successfully execute what was expected, and remain under budget. The project team used several software tools, such as Together Control Center (TCC), to help organize the project components and facilitate communication with the various stakeholders. Using these tools, the project team was able to create software, develop code and synchronize efforts throughout the various stages of the project. In addition, these tools helped the design team complete tasks quickly and in a more organized fashion. The team also held daily status meetings between representatives of the government, each of the military services and the contractor to highlight progress and discuss concerns. To a great extent, it was this steady and controlled communication effort that helped the project team develop and deploy DOEHRS-IH.",
"notes": "Original title: Results"
}