# IT 510 FINAL PROJECT
System Proposal for New Century Wellness
Group
Daina Love
# INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
PROBLEM STATEMENT
AUDIENCE

# SYSTEMS REQUIREMENTS
REQUIREMENTS MODELING
DATA PROCESS MODEL
DATA FLOW DIAGRAM
DATA DICTIONARY
OBJECT MODELING
USE CASE DIAGRAMS

# SYSTEMS DESIGN
SPECIFICATIONS
DATA DESIGN
USER INTERFACE DESIGN
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS

# PROJECT PLAN
WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
PROJECT MONITORING & CONTROL PLAN
TIMELINE
RESOURCE SHEET
COST SHEET
WORKS CITED
# INTRODUCTION
## Background
Just about every major industry has made large strides towards computerization. More and more Americans rely on computer networks to do things like shop, request services, and even earn degrees. Technology has transformed and improved our lives in so many ways, yet our healthcare system seems to be lagging behind this trend. In order to keep up with a technology driven society, we need to incorporate computerization into our medical practices. New Century Wellness Group is a cutting edge medical provider offering a holistic approach to healthcare focusing on preventative and traditional medical care. The clinic has a patient base of 8,000 patients coming from 325 different employers who, for the most part, provide healthcare benefits to their employees. New Century is currently accepting health insurance plans from 25 different insurance carriers. Because of their success, New Century is now considering opening a new location. Being that the medical field thrives on information and communication, it is time New Century makes technology work for them too. With an Electronic Medical Record (EMR) system in place New Century could better serve patients’ spending less time trying to keep an out-of-date filing and billing system in order, and focusing more on their health and wellbeing.

## Problem Statement
Currently, New Century Wellness Group is using a mixture of paper-based and fragmented computer systems to keep track of patient records (Rosenblatt, 2014). Lisa Sung manages patient appointments and initiates patient files, and then Susan Gifford maintains the physical patient records and ensures completion. Carla Herrera orders replacement supplies after patient visits. Tammy Alipio begins the billing process, and Tom Capaletti follows up on claims.
# CURRENT PAGE

made  to make  sure  the  office  is  getting  paid.   Fred Brown  is  charge  of  human  resources  and
employee  benefits.   Corinne  Summers  who  reports of Fred, works with  payroll,  tax reporting,
and profit  distribution  (Rosenblatt,  Systems  Analysis  and Design,  Tenth  Edition,  2014).  This
workflow  has  worked up until  now,  but with  the  changes  to the  healthcare  system,  ever-growing
number  of patients  and influx  of  patient  data, these  people  of overworked  and stressed  out.   The
growing  amount  of  work causes employees  to have  to devote  six  hours  of overtime  each week
just  to keep up.  This  system  results  in  about  three  file  errors each  day, and each error takes
twenty  minutes  to correct.  At this  rate, the  clinic  will  need  to hire  another  clerical  person.
Continuing  to run  the office  this  way  is inefficient  and not  cost effective,  and makes  New
Century  vulnerable  to human errors and can negatively impact our patients’ care and experience.
To improve  operations  and keep workflow  running  smoothly,  we need  to implement  an
Electronic  Medical  Records  (EMR)  system.   This  new  system  will  support our patients’ sensitive
data, improve  how  the providers  dictate  orders for  patients  through  the Computerized  Provider
Order Entry  (CPOE), and  allow  providers  to give  the best possible  care to patients  through  a
Clinical  Decision  Support System  (CDSS).
“An EMR contains the standard medical and clinical data gathered in one provider’s
office”  (HealthIT.gov,  2014).  EMRs  are used  to track patient  data over  time,  identify  patient
needs for  preventative  care and screenings,  monitor  how  patients  compare  to certain  parameters
like  vaccinations  and blood  pressure  readings,  and improve  overall  quality  of the care we provide
(HealthIT.gov,  2014).  This  system  would  also  provide  a Computerized  Provider  Entry  (CPOE)
system.   CPOE is  an application  that  would  allow  our providers  to enter  medical  orders into  the
computer  system  instead  of  using  traditional  methods  such  as paper prescriptions  and verbal
instructions.   This  way,  our providers  can electronically  specify  medication  orders, laboratory
# AUDIENCE
The intended audience for this proposal is the entire staff of New Century Wellness Group, including those who may not be technologically inclined. The proposed system is...
# SYSTEMS REQUIREMENTS
## Requirements modeling
The system New Century Wellness Group is currently using is not only outdated but also not working for the staff. It is a mixture of paper-based and legacy systems that depends entirely too much on the staff for accuracy and completion. New Century staff includes four primary care physicians, one nurse practitioner, four physical therapists, one registered nutritionist, eight nurses and eight staff members caring for a patient base of 8,000 from 325 different employers who cover employees’ health and maintenance. New Century currently accepts 25 different health insurance providers. On top of all this, they are planning to open another branch. Each staff member is responsible for different aspects of how the business is run and there is too much room for error. At this rate the current staff will have to start putting in overtime and they will need to hire at least one more staff member.

Currently, Anita Davenport, the office manager, supervises the seven-member staff. Fred Brown is in charge of human resources and oversees employee benefits. Corinne Summers reports directly to him and is responsible for payroll, tax reporting and profit distribution among the associates. Susan Gifford maintains the patient medical records. Tom Capaletti oversees accounts receivables. Tammy Alipio is a billing specialist and takes care of insurance billing. Lisa Sung, the receptionist, manages appointments, contacts patients to remind them of upcoming appointments and prepares each provider’s daily appointment list.
# PROJECT OVERVIEW
Carla Herrera orders replacement medical supplies after patient visits (Rosenblatt, Systems Analysis and Design, Tenth Edition, 2014). The staff is overworked and they will soon need to hire more staff if something is not done to change this.

## Objective
To improve this situation, Dr. Jones has asked that we create an in-house system so that the providers and the staff can work more efficiently. We are going to implement a business solution system and an EMR system that will work together. They want a medical practice software solution that allows office staff to streamline scheduling, billing, accounting, and payroll as well as support an Electronic Medical Record (EMR) system, Computerized Provider Order Entry (CPOE) system, and Clinical Decision Support System (CDSS). A prebuilt EMR software system was presented and considered, but Dr. Jones prefers that we build the system in-house so that they can customize it and possibly upgrade to an EHR system in the future.

## System Functionality
The integrated system we are building will work as follows:
- When a patient calls in, Lisa Sung will schedule an appointment with an appropriate provider dependent upon services requested.
- When they come to their scheduled appointment, their provider is notified and an EMR is initiated which will include their patient demographics, medical history, and insurance information. This also creates a daily list of appointments.
- Whichever provider the patient sees will then enter any medical orders and/or prescriptions into the EMR with the CPOE system. Their input is supported by the CDSS to ensure proper care is administered.
- Patients then schedule a follow up appointment with Lisa.
- Susan Gifford reviews the EMR to make sure records are complete and entered correctly.
- Carla Herrera orders supplies to replace items used for patient visits.
- Tammy Alipio will then bill their insurance provider based on services rendered.
- Tom Capaletti follows up on billing to ensure claims are paid.
# SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS

The requirements for the system are as follows:

## System Inputs:
- Patients’ personal information: name, address, phone number, birth date, insurance information, marital status, etc.
- Medical history: medications, past surgeries, lab results, etc.
- Appointment times
- Employee information: name, contact information, title, pay, work schedule

## System Outputs:
- Billing/insurance claims: patient’s procedures at the time visit sent to their insurance company with corresponding billing codes
- Prescriptions, orders for lab testing, referrals to other medical providers
- Supply orders
- Daily provider appointment lists
- Employee paychecks and benefits

## System Processes:
- Each patient’s procedures are properly coded for accurate billing and follow up procedures
- Medication and patient medical information are cross referenced to minimize negative drug interactions or overlapping care
- If there is a conflict between patient history and new medical orders the system will immediately alert the provider via a message on the screen
# SYSTEM PERFORMANCE
Patient appointments entered into schedule, and daily appointment lists are generated

## System Performance
- System should be fully functional during business hours and any hours of operation
- System transactions should be fast and smooth

# SYSTEM CONTROL
Each staff member should have unique login credentials with varying layers of access; for example, should not have the same level of access to patient records as providers
Each staff member’s access and capabilities should correspond to their responsibilities

# DATA PROCESS MODEL
The following diagrams are representative of the various processes that the new system will perform. There will be an EMR process, business solution process, Clinical Decision Support process and a human resources module for in house staff solutions.

## EMR Process
1
1

## Business Solution Process
9
# CDSS PROCESS
Provider                     Possible effects                                  Patient
oiratert
~Medical Orders
Clinical                        Patert ifc
Decision
Support System

# HR MODULE
Ccrinne                  Employee
Summer: &                 Infonzhon                               Employees
Fred Brown
Human                   Paycheck
Benefits'
Resource:              Work Schedule
# DATA FLOW DIAGRAM
Provider
D1 Patient
Database
Send t7 Aod Lft
proiiier Upcae Pereznal iata
Urdzte
Medical
Infomation
Patient
Infomation
Insurance
Create daily
appoinmnent
Appointment
Database
Rabd claim
Aocept -2 2c-c-
Claim: and
Cpiate appcintert info Billing System
D; Accounts
Receivable
SStafWc
HR
Module
HR info
D4 Employee
Infomation

# DATA DICTIONARY
Data Stores
1. Patient Database: Stores all personal and medical information for each patient. Staff and providers use this database to identify each individual patient in terms of contact information and medical history use this information.
2. Appointment Database: Stores appointment dates and times. Takes personal information about patients and creates daily appointment lists for providers.
# OBJECT MODELING
The objects included in this system are patient information, claims and billing, medical information, human resources module, and the creation of the daily appointment lists.

## Accounts Receivable
Stores payment and insurance information for each patient. Sends claims for patients to their respective insurance companies, receives notification of acceptance or rejection of said claims, and generates bills for patients.

## Employee Information
Stores all personal information regarding staff members. Used to identify staff members and determine pay and benefits.

## Data Flows
- Input personal data
- Update
- Input
- Send to provider
- Bill patient
- Payment
- Update
- Update appointment information
- Send claim
- Accept/reject
- Staff information
- Pay and benefits information
- Update/check claim status
- HR info
# OBJECTS AND ATTRIBUTES
the objects have attributes telling what information is included and methods detailing what the system will do that information.

## Patient Information
- **Attributes**
- Patient ID#
- Name
- Address
- Phone
- DOB
- SSV
- Sex
- Marital Status
- **Medical Information**
- **Attributes**
- Patient ID#
- Patient name
- Height weight
- Blood type
- Prescriptions
- Past procedures
- Allergies
- Vaccines
- **Methods**
- Add update
- Send claim
- Bill patient
- Procedure
- Lab orders
- Referrals
- Key prescriptions
- Create Daily Appointment List

## HR Module
- **Attributes**
- Employee name
- Employee address
- Employee phone
- Employee title
- Employee benefits
- Paycheck
- Hire
- Terminate
- **Methods**
- Add appointment
- Cancel appointment
- Reschedule appointment

# USE CASE DIAGRAMS
Each of the following use case diagrams (UCD) will indicate the user processes of this system. I will be including a UCD for the scheduling system, the EMR system, the billing system, and the HR module. These diagrams will detail how each user will operate various parts of the system.
# APPOINTMENT SCHEDULING
## Appointment Schedule
- Upoate
- Lisa Sung

## Patient
- Patient Database
- cneck
- Susan Gifford

## EMR System
- EMR
- Lome
- ppcintmient
- Treatment
- Update EMR
- CDSS

## Patient
- Undete
- Provider
- Medical Information
# BILLING CLAIMS SYSTEM
Send Claim

## Insurance
- Accept or reject claim: Tammy Alipio
- Payment Accounts Receivable: Check claim status
- Patient: seno
- Billing and claims: Tom Capaletti

# HR MODULE
HR and Personnel

## Give Personnel Information
- Employee Database
- Staff Payroll and taxes: Corinne Summers
# SYSTEMS DESIGN
## Specifications
At the  moment  New Century  Wellness  Group requires  six  hours  of  office  staff  overtime and they  will  have  to hire  another  clerical  person  within  six  month  just  to keep up with  all  of  the work.  New Century  needs a computer  system  in  place to eliminate  the  need for  overtime  work and a new  hire.   It will  also  significantly  cut  down on the  number  of errors  made to each file. Currently,  New Century  sees an average  of three  errors per day and each errors  takes about twenty  minutes  to correct.

My investigation  into  what  type  of system  would  be best for  New Century  began  with several  face-to-face  meetings  with  Dr. Jones and  Anita  Davenport.   Together  we reviewed  office records and accounting  records.   As far  as business  solutions  go, I was able to deduce that  the four  key areas that  most  needed improvement  were  patient  scheduling,  billing  and accounts receivable,  human  resources  and payroll.    These  areas are highly  interactive  and therefore  an integrated  system  would  be best (Rosenblatt,  Systems  Design  and Analysis,  10th  Edition,  2014). Dr. Jones also  expressed  interest  in  an EMR  system,  but  after  research  and careful  consideration we decided a separate system  for  this  would  work best.  I wanted  to make  sure every  member  of staff  who  will  use this  system  has a sense  of ownership  so in  my  further  investigations  I was sure to take everyone’s needs and wants into consideration when coming up with this plan.          I conducted  staff  interviews,  reviewed  office  reports, and observed  office  workflow  and believe  I have come up with the best solution for New Century’s currently patient load, and future growth.

The medical services and procedures currently performed by New Century’s medical staff  are coded in  accordance  with  the  American  Medical  Association’s Current Procedure Terminology  (CPT).  A CPT code is made  up of five  numeric  digits  and a two-digit  suffix. These  codes are required  by most  insurance  companies  to ensure  proper paying  and billing.
# EMR SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION

The new EMR system will be able to handle the new ICD-10 procedure coding system, which has been a requirement of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) since October 1, 2014. The new codes will consist of seven alphanumeric characters to be electronically transmitted and received. The system must also interface with twenty-five California health insurance providers. With this new system in place, New Century will be able to cut costs and patients will be able to go online to update their medical information, schedule appointments, and request medical records (Rosenblatt, Systems Analysis and Design, 10th Edition, 2014).

## System Diagram
Below is a diagram of how the system will work.

- Patient
- Mcnthl"
- Provider
- Patient Daz
- American Medical Association
- Pazent Datz
- ICD-10 Coding
- New Century EMR System
- Orders Treatment
- Claims
- Patient Call
- Staff
- Report Accept
- Reject Claim
# DATA DESIGN
The following entity relationship diagrams (ERD) outline my proposed solution for New Century. The first ERD describes the patient scheduling component of the system. The patient speaks to the receptionist scheduling an appointment with an available provider. The system then generates an Appointment List for providers and initiates an EMR for the patient.

The next ERD displays the provider’s interaction with the EMR. When the patient comes to their scheduled appointment they fill out a patient intake form asking for further personal information, medical history, and insurance information. This information is entered into their EMR and the provider enters current medical information pertaining to the visit. The provider can then use the CPOE system to enter medical orders for the patient. The CDSS then uses the information in the EMR to ensure proper care is given.
# BILLING PROCESS
After the appointment comes the billing process. Using the information entered by the provider, the receptionist sends the billing codes and information to Tammy Alippio the billing specialist. The claim is sent to the insurance company for processing. Any copays or remaining balance not paid by insurance is then billed directly to the patient. When the patient pays their bill the funds are submitted to accounts receivable where Tom Capaletti can review it.
# CURRENT_PAGE_RAW_OCR_TEXT
I
49 L
] Jia 11 a

Next I have a series of third normal function (3NF) charts. The primary key is going to be patient ID generated by their initials and the last four digits of their social security number. Each ID is unique to each patient. Using this patient ID, databases are generated pertaining to the provider(s) have seen, the Appointment List, and their billing status. I’ll first start with an example of the personal information of two fictional patients.
# PATIENT INFORMATION
Patient      Name          SSN        DOB            Address          Phone        Insurance    Providers
ID
JD1234       Doe, John     198-76-    01/01/1980     123 Penny        215-555-     Yes          Jones
1234                      Ln               2425
AS4321       Smith,        678-34-    02/02/1986     710              215-555-     Yes          Garcia
Alicia        4321                      Columbus  St     3254

# APPOINTMENT LIST
Using this information, the system can generate an Appointment list for the providers. Lists will be generated daily and will be specific to each provider. When providers login to the system they will see their personal schedule for that day. Each patient ID will be linked to the information found in the above database. Note: Date and Time can be populated by the database instead of being entered by hand to cut down on occurrences of human errors.

## Appointment Schedule
Patient  ID   Provider   Date         Time
JD1234        Jones      6/1/2016     10:00 AM
AS4321        Garcia     6/2/2016     10:30 AM

# BILLING RECORDS
The system will also be able to keep track of billing records. When a patient is billed, the system will show the billing code, when bill was sent, when it is due and whether or not payment has been received. Again, the patient ID links all of this. Note: Dates and times can be populated by the database as opposed to being entered by hand, and the Payment Received column can either feature a Yes or No response, or a checkbox. These options are meant to reduce human error.

## Billing Information
Patient  ID  Billing  Code    Bill  Sent   Bill  Due  Date  Payment  Received
JD1234       BM5555           6/6/2016     7/1/2016         Yes
AS4321       GH6565           6/7/2016     7/2/2016         Yes

# USER INTERFACE DESIGN
The User Interface is one of the most important parts of this report because it will show the users what the system will look like. I have done my best to create a system that will be easy for all staff members to use and that will address all system requirements. I have drawn some
# MOCKUPS OF THE PROPOSED SYSTEM
You will notice that I have included buttons for various portions of the system. I have included a login and password page where staff members will enter their unique login credentials each time they access the system.

NEW CENTURY WELLNESS GROUP
Login:
Password:

Next I have included a welcome page for each user to choose a portal that will best suit their purpose for using the system. There is a button for doctors, nurses, reception, HR, patient records, and employee schedule. Each button will then take the user to the selected area of the system. The Doctor Portal will contain patient records sorted by the six-digit Patient ID previously discussed. Here, he or she can see any and all medical information New Century has for each patient at any time. They can also see their daily appointment lists here. Nurses can also view patient information under the Nurse Portal. They can also see various schedules pertaining to the patients they will see each day. The Reception Portal allows the receptionist, Lisa Sung, to see all scheduled appointments and allows her to schedule and cancel appointments for patients. The HR portal will have all employee records and payroll information.
# EMPLOYEE PORTAL FUNCTIONALITY
employees will also find their paystubs, employee schedule, and information regarding benefits. Patient Records will provide a view of patient records for Susan Gifford, who keeps and maintains patient records, again sorted by Patient ID. Carla Herrera will also have access to this portal so that she can order replacement supplies after appointments. Weekly Reports will generate the requested office reports such as Daily Appointment Lists, Daily Call List, and Weekly Provider Reports. Accounting will contain accounts receivable information, patient statements, Claim Status Summaries, and will generate Weekly Insurance Reports.

## Portal Access
- Doctoral Portal
- Nurse Portal
- Reception Portal
- HR Portal
- Patient Records
- Weekly Reports
- Accounting Portal

## Appointment Scheduling
When a patient calls in to schedule an appointment, Lisa will click the Reception Portal button and be taken to another screen where she will be presented with another set of options. Here she can click a button for Add Appointment, Cancel Appointment, or View Appointment Schedule. Screenshots of these screens are shown below.
# RECEPTION PORTAL
What would you like to do?
- Add
- Carcel
- Viaw
- Appolnunent
- Appolntment
- Appolntmentt
- Schedulet

If Add Appointment is clicked, she will be taken to a screen where she can add all pertinent patient information, i.e., name, phone number, date, time, and reason for their visit. If it is a new patient, a patient ID will be generated when they fill out a patient intake form. They will have the option to fill this form out online, or at the time of their visit. If it is a returning patient, the system will recognize their name and add their patient ID.

## Add New Appointment
- Name
- Phone
- Date
- Time
- Reason for Visit
# APPOINTMENT MANAGEMENT

The addition of appointments will generate a master list of all scheduled appointments. This master list can be reviewed and edited when necessary. The Cancel Appointment button and View Appointment Schedule button both lead to this list. If Ms. Sung has to cancel or reschedule an appointment she can simply double click the person’s name from the list and a window will appear with options for cancellation or rescheduling. Canceling will result in another window for verification of canceled appointment, and rescheduling will take her back to the original Add Appointment screen.

Next, I have included a suggested Provider Appointment List. It shows patient ID, patient name, appointment date, appointment time, and reason for visit. Each Patient ID will also service as a link to their various medical records for easy review.

## Appointment List for Provider*
- Patient ID: JD1234, Name: Doe, John, Date: 3/24/2016, Time: 10.00 AM
- Patient ID: 454321, Name: Smiitr, Alicia, Date: 3/24/2016, Time: 10.30 AM, Reason: Headaches
- Patient ID: Mt5678, Name: Thoripson, Michael, Date: 3/24/2016, Time: 11.30 AM, Reason: Follow Up
- Patient ID: HR2O14, Name: Rcsenblatt, Hatty, Date: 3/24/2016, Time: 1.45 PM, Reason: Vaccination

A patient EMR would like the picture below. It will include all personal and medical information for each patient. There is also an area for notes about the patient.
# PATIENT INFORMATION
JD1234 DOE, JOHN
DOB:                          Weight:
Address:                      Height:
Phone:                        Blood Type:
E-mail:                       Smoke?:
Employment:                   Current Conditions:
Marital Status:               Blood Pressure:
Religion:                     Current Medications:
Patient Notes

# PATIENT APPOINTMENT DOCUMENTATION
Next, is my suggested interface for patient appointment documentation. When the patient comes for an appointment, the provider will be able to review the patient EMR, and during the visit they will have various orders and take notes about what is discussed. On this page the CPOE and CDSS will come into play.
JD1234 DOE, JOHN
DATE visit:
Reason:
Symptoms:
Temperature:
Treatment:
Prescriptions (If applicable):
Notes:
# PROVIDER ORDER ENTRY
If the provider will use the CPOE to enter medical orders and order prescriptions supported by the CDSS. If provider makes an order that will negatively interact with patient’s current conditions or medication, a window will pop up alerting provider. The provider will be able to change their order(s) if necessary, or they can dismiss the suggestion pursuant to their medical expertise.

## Example Order
- JD1234 DOE, JOHN
- complteRized ProwidER 0rdeR ENTRY
- Reason: Flu
- Orders: Bed rest; fluids
- Prescription: Tamiflu

- JD1234 DOE; JOHN
- coMFl 2E D PRC"IdE # CRD-? ENTRY
- Reason: Flu
- Orders: Bed rest; fluids
- Prescription: Tamiflu

## Warning
WARNING: Patient could nave allergic reacton to preszribed medication.
- New Order
- Dismiss
# SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Each of the twenty-five staff members at New Century currently has their own workstation. To ensure this system is efficient we will need to make sure each one is compatible with the new system. This will most likely require new hardware. Specifically speaking, the nurses work from one of three nurses’ stations throughout the day. Each station should have at least three computers and one high-volume network laser printer/scanner. The reception area will have an impact printer for medical forms and a network printer.
# FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS
This is the best solution for New Century Wellness Group. It not only allows them to have a large impact on the design of their system, it is also best way for them to make their office run more efficiently. My solution is the most feasible because it addresses all system requirements without breaking the bank. We are effectively modernizing New Century while making the day-to-day operations of the business easier. I have outlined below each of the ways this system will help New Century and its staff.
# OPERATIONAL FEASIBILITY
This system is tailor-made so that staff members can be easily trained to use the system and begin implementing it right away. Once I show them the basics, operation will be fairly straightforward. I estimate that staff will need about ten hours of training each week for the first three months, and then they will be able to successfully navigate the system without difficulty. They will also be able to perform routine maintenance, file backups, and system updates. This system will eliminate the need for employee overtime because it is faster and more efficient than the traditional filing system currently being used.

# TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY
New Century will need new hardware installed to support this new system. My team and I will be happy to take care of this during our allotted build time. This way we can ensure all workstations are up-to-date, and compatible with the system and can communicate with each other. This system adds more mobility so the providers can move from patient to patient quickly without having to shuffle through papers and physical files.

# ECONOMIC FEASIBILITY
Currently, at least one member of the New Century staff is working six hours of overtime each week. At $15.00 per hour, that is totals $4,320.00 above regular pay per year. Staff is also making about three errors each day, and each taking twenty minutes to correct; that is an extra five hours of wasted time costing $3,600.00 per year. At this rate, New Century partners are aware that they will need to hire a new full time clerical worker in the next six months to keep up with the workload. The base annual salary for this person will be approximately $31,200.00, assuming they start at $15.00 per hour. This does not include their benefits or the training period this person will need.
# SCHEDULE FEASIBILITY
I will be bringing on two programmers to help me with the system build and implementation. This will keep my build on schedule and will ensure timely delivery. It is of the utmost importance that we keep you, our client, happy. We will work diligently to stay on schedule and complete this system in a timely manner. We are aware that New Century Wellness Group is a thriving business with a growing patient base so we can assure you that our work will not impair your business operations in any way.
# PROJECT PLAN
## WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is a hierarchical decomposition of the project objectives into deliverable-oriented tasks that are executed by the project team to accomplish the overall project goals (Piscopo, 2012). An undertaking such as this is quite large and will take some time to complete. The WBS divides the project into smaller, more manageable portions to make sure my team and I can maintain control and complete the tasks in a timely and organized manner. Beginning with higher-level tasks and moving downward, the tasks start off broad and gradually become more detailed. I designed the WBS so that you can follow our progress and see when tasks will be completed. Below is my propose WBS for your EMR system. My team and I will do our best to stick to this schedule so that you are aware of everything that is going on, and if issues arise I will immediately alert you when necessary.

WBS      Task Name                                                 Duration     Predecessors
New Century Wellness Group EMR Project Plan              173.75 days
Discovery Phase                                        days
1.2           Systems Analysis Phase                                20.75 days
Design Phase                                            days
1.4           Systems Development Phase                                 days
1.5           Planning Phase                                          days
1.6           Systems Implementation Phase                              days
1.6.1           Hire programmers                                     10 days
1.6.2           Review DFDs, 0-Os, ERDs, and tables                 5 days
1.6.3           Installation                                         10 days
1.6.4           Testing                                               davs
1.6.5           Evaluation                                            days
1.6.6           Train Staff                                          15 days
Systems Support and Security                            days
1.7.1           Routine Maintenance, File Backups, Updating             days
# PROJECT MONITORING & CONTROL PLAN
As the systems analyst for this project, I am also acting as the project manager. It is my job to make sure that this project runs smoothly and that my client, New Century Wellness Group, and my programming team, Celia Goldring and Bill Miller, are satisfied. I want to start by implementing structured walk-throughs. A structured walk-through is a review of a project team member’s work by other members of the team (Rosenblatt, Systems Analysis and Design, 10th Edition, 2014). The programmers will review each other’s work and my plans, and I will review their work as well. Testing each other’s codes and designs will ensure proper system implementation.
# PROJECT MANAGEMENT STRATEGY

As the lead on this project, it is my job to expect the unexpected. Just as in life, sometimes projects have issues. By mapping out my System Development Life Cycle (SDLC) in my WBS, I can begin to anticipate potential issues. This type of forward thinking can help me minimize setbacks and stay on schedule and on budget. I plan on following a Program Evaluation Review Technique, or PERT, chart to help my team stay on schedule. The PERT chart will map out exactly what needs to be done to ensure the new system is implemented properly (Rosenblatt, Systems Design and Analysis, 10th Edition, 2014). Keeping this chart will also allow me to keep New Century’s partners and staff apprised of our progress. PERT charts display all necessary tasks, task patterns and their durations; it will also help me know if and when critical elements and milestones are not being met.

I will also be sure to meet with my team often to assess their progress. Through regular project status meetings with Bill and Celia, I will be able to collect, verify, organize and evaluate information about the project. I will be able to relay any necessary information to Dr. Jones and the New Century staff. These meetings will also allow my team and I to brainstorm solutions to any problems that arise. Should the New Century staff prefer documented progress, these meetings will allow me to create reports detailing exactly where we are in the implementation process and answer any questions they may have. I also plan on meeting with Dr. Jones throughout implementation to answer any questions he and partners may have. I want to make sure he feels comfortable with the progress we are making and the systems we are building for his practice.

My critical path, or the sequence of stages determining the minimum time needed for an operation, especially when analyzed on a computer for a large organization can be seen below in my Timeline section.
# TIMELINE
I estimate implantation will take 12 weeks or 60 working days. To exhibit this I have included a Gantt chart on the next page for your convenience. It is a horizontal bar chart representative of the systems implementation tasks (Rosenblatt, Systems Design and Analysis, 10th Edition, 2014). The chart also includes a specific task list from my previous WBS and the duration of each task. You will also notice that the section of the bar chart next to implementation tasks is red. These are critical tasks. These tasks are key to the project’s timely completion.

## Task Name
- New Century Wellness Group EMR Project Plan: 173.75 days
- Discovery Phase: 20.75 days
- Systems Analysis Phase: 17 days
- Design Phase: 49 days
- Systems Development Phase: 60 days
- Planning Phase: 10 days
- Systems Implementation Phase: 60 days
- Hire programmers: 10 days
- Review DFDs, O-Os, ERDs, and tables: days
- Installation: 10 days
- Testing: 15 days
- Evaluation: days
- Train Staff: 15 days
- Systems Support and Security: 60 days
- Routine Maintenance, File Backups, Updating: 60 days

As you can see, my team and I will be handling those critical tasks. The chart also gives a timeframe for when we will be done which I am estimating to be this coming February. Next I have included a Resource Sheet and Cost sheet detailing all parties involved in this project and costs associated with this project.
# RESOURCE SHEET
Resource Name      Type     Initials   Max:        Rate   Ovt;      Accrue   Base
Daina Love        Work                    100% S35.00/hr   So.oO/hr Prorated Standard
Anita Davenport Work                      100%    so.oo/hr S15.o/hr Prorated Standard
Lisa Sung         Work                    100%    so.oo/hr  S15./hr Prorated Standard
Susan Gifford     Work                    100%    so.oo/hr S15.0/hr Prorated Standard
Tom Capaletti     Work                    100%   so.oo/hr S15.00/hr Prorated Standard
Carla Herrera     Work                    1007  so.oo/hr  S15.00/hr Prorated Standard
Fred Brown        Work                    100%    so.oo/hr  S15./hr Prorated Standard
Corinne           Work                    100%    So.oo/hr S15.o/hr Prorated Standard
Summers
Dr. Jones         Work                    100%   so.oo/hr S15.OO/hr Prorated Standard
Tammy Alipio      Work                    100%   so.oo/hr S15.00/hr Prorated Standard
Celia Goldring    Work                    100%    so.oo/hr S15.o/hr Prorated Standard
Bill Miller       Work                    100%   so.oo/hr S15.00/hr Prorated Standard

# COST SHEET
Task Name                Fixed Cost     Total     Baseline  Variance  Actual    Remainir
New Century Wellness         Prorated S45,080.00    So.00 S45,080.00   S70.00 S45,010.00
Group EMR Project Plan
Discovery Phase            Prorated  S1,400.00    So.00  S1,400.00    So.00  S1,400.00
Systems Analysis Phase     Prorated  S3,360.00    So.0o  S3,360.00   S70.00  S3,290.00
Design Phase               Prorated  52,240.00    So.0o  52,240.00    So.00  52,240.00
Systems Development        Prorated 54,760.00     So.0o  S4,760.00    So.0o  S4,760.00
Phase
Planning Phase             Prorated      So.0o    So.0o      So.0o    So.0o      So.0o
Systems                    Prorated S16,520.00    So.00 S16,520.00    So.0o S16,520.00
Implementation Phase
Hire programmers         Prorated  52,800.00    So.0O  52,800.00     SO.00 S2,800.00
Review DFDs, 0-Os_       Prorated  S1,120.00    So.00  S1,120.00    So.00  S1,120.00
ERDs, and tables
Installation             Prorated  S2,800.00    So.00  S2,800.00    So.00  S2,800.00
Testing                   Prorated 54,200.00    SO.OO  54,200.00    SO.OO  54,200.00
Evaluation               Prorated  S1,400.00    So.OO  S1,400.00    So.OO  S1,400.00
Train Staff              Prorated  54,200.00    So.0O  54,200.00    So.0O  54,200.00
Systems Support and        Prorated S16,800.00    So.0o S16,800.00    So.0o S16,800.00
Security
Routine                  Prorated S16,800.00    SO.0o S16,800.00    SO.O0 S16,800.00
Maintenance, File
Backups, Updating
# NEW CENTURY WELLNESS GROUP
New Century Wellness Group is a thriving medical clinic. It is my belief that with the help of my system, New Century could be even more successful. My system will help the office run more efficiently and taken some of the burden off of the staff so that their main concern can be the patients. Thank you for your time and consideration. If you should have any further questions please do not hesitate to contact me.
# WORKS CITED
Dixon,  B. E., & Zafar,  A. (2009, January). Inpatient Computerized Provider Order Entry (CPOE). Retrieved  June  1, 2016, from  U.S. Department  of  Health  and Human  Services: https://healthit.ahrq.gov/ahrq-funded-projects/emerging-lessons/computerized-provider-order-entry-inpatient/inpatient-computerized-provider-order-entry-cpoe

HealthIT.gov.  (2014, August  29). Benefits of EHRs. Retrieved  May  2016, 2016, from HealthIT.gov:  https://www.healthit.gov/providers-professionals/electronic-medical-records-emr

HealthIT.gov.  (2015, July  30). Benefits of Electronic Health Records  (EHRs).  Retrieved  May 31, 2016, from  HealthIT.gov:  https://www.healthit.gov/providers-professionals/benefits-electronic-health-records-ehrs

Menachemi,  N., & Collum,  T. H. (2011, May  11). Benefits and drawbacks of electronic health record systems. Retrieved  May 31, 2016, from  National  Center  for  Biotechnology  Information: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3270933/

Piscopo,  M. (2012, May  6). Creating a Work Breakdown Structure With Microsoft Project. Retrieved  June  16, 2016, from  Project Smart:  https://www.projectsmart.co.uk/creating-a-work-breakdown-structure-with- microsoft-project.php

Rosenblatt,  H. J. (2014). Systems Analysis and Design, 10th Edition. Cengage  Learning.

Rosenblatt,  H. J. (2014). Systems Analysis and Design, 10th Edition. Cengage  Learning.

Rosenblatt,  H. J. (2014). Systems Analysis and Design, 10th Edition. Cengage  Learning.

Rosenblatt,  H. J. (2014). Systems Analysis and Design, Tenth Edition. United  States:  Nelson.

Rosenblatt,  H. J. (2014). Systems Analysis and Design, Tenth Edition. Cengage  Learning.

Rosenblatt,  H. J. (2014). Systems Analysis and Design, Tenth Edition. Cengage  Learning.

Rosenblatt,  H. J. (2014). Systems Analysis and Design, Tenth Edition. Cengage  Learning.
# REFERENCES
Rosenblatt,  H. J. (2014). Systems Design and Analysis, 10th Edition. Cengage  Learning.
Rosenblatt,  H. J. (2014). Systems Design and Analysis, 10th Edition. Cengage  Learning.
Rosenblatt,  H. J. (2014). Systems Design and Analysis, 10th Edition. Cengage  Learning.